# numsgpsalg
Written by Christopher O'Neill and Sviatoslav Zinevich.  

Provides a Python class `NumericalSemigroupAlg` for use with the computer algebra system [Sage](http://sagemath.org/) that adds functionality for working with numerical semigroup algebras.  The package was developed as part of a senior thesis project by Sviatoslav Zinevich, an undergraduate student at University of California Davis.  For a more detailed overview, see [Sviatoslav's senior thesis](https://www.math.ucdavis.edu/files/4515/2903/6806/s18-zinevich-sviatoslav-thesis.pdf).  

Please note that this is an *alpha version* and subject to change without notice.  

## License
numsgpsalg is released under the terms of the [MIT license](https://tldrlegal.com/license/mit-license).  The MIT License is simple and easy to understand and it places almost no restrictions on what you can do with this software.

## Usage
When creating a new class instance, it is required to enter the semigroup generators in the form of a list, as the Sage package requires the list to generate the semigroup, as well as the size of the coefficient field. During initialization, the semigroup is created using the NumericalSemigroup package and is assigned to the `semigroup` class member. A ring is also generated using the Sage `PolynomialRing()` function. A class member `vars` is also created in order for the user to generate an object variable. 

	sage> alg = NumericalSemigroupAlg([2, 3], 2)
	sage> alg
	Numerical Semigroup Algebra object generated by the semigroup 
	[2, 3] in the semigroup algebra with 2 elements
	sage> x = alg.vars[0]
	sage> x^19 + x^14 + x^6 + x^4 + 1 in alg
	True
	sage> x^13 + x^7 + x^5 + 1 in alg
	False

In addition, a dictionary is created to store the factorization of every single polynomial generated. Thus, once a factorization of a polynomial has been computed, it won't have to be computed again later, saving resources. Using dynamic programming  proves to be very useful, as polynomial decomposition is an inherently recursive process, where every reducible polynomial consists of the multiplication of smaller-degree polynomials. Having a dictionary changes the requirements of the algorithm, as it now has no need to shy away from computing multiple factorizations, but actually encourages them, since a comprehensive factorization dictionary enables fast look up.

The `factorization()` function  takes in a Sage polynomial. This is the public method that generates all the factorizations of the polynomial, here named `element`, in the semigroup algebra. 

	sage> alg.factorization(x^9 + x^2 + 1)
	[[x^4 + x^3 + 1, x^5 + x^4 + x^3 + x^2 + 1]]
	sage> alg.factorization(x^11 + x^4)
	[[x^2, x^2, x^7 + 1],
	 [x^2, x^2, x^3 + x^2 + 1, x^4 + x^3 + x^2 + 1],
	 [x^5 + x^3 + x^2, x^6 + x^4 + x^3 + x^2],
	 [x^3 + x^2, x^3 + x^2 + 1, x^5 + x^3 + x^2]]

The next function, `isIrreducible()`, checks if a given polynomial is irreducible. The optional second argument determines which implementation is used.


The default, `isIrreducible(p, True)` takes in a Sage polynomial as input, and checks reducibility using a recursive algorithm. The recursive function `isIrreducible()` is a stripped down version of `factorization()`. If the polynomial is irreducible, it returns `True`, otherwise it returns `False`. It does so with an algorithm very similar to that of `factorization()`. However, at the point where the factorization algorithm delves to find the factorization of the devising polynomials, `isIrreducible()` stops. It does not need to factor the divisors because their existence implies the original polynomial is reducible.

 The second implementation of `isIrreducbile(p, False)`, also finds whether a polynomial is irreducible in the semigroup algebra. However, unlike the recursive `isIrreducible()` version, it does so without using recursion. This is accomplished by observing that the recursive algorithm simply looks for the right combination of irreducibles that form a polynomial in the semigroup algebra and divide the input polynomial into another polynomial in the semigroup algebra. 

	sage> alg.isIrreducible(x^6 + 1, True)
	False
	sage> alg.isIrreducible(x^8 + x^7 + x^4 + 1, True)
	True
	sage> alg.isIrreducible(x^16 + x^9 + 1, False)
	False
	sage> alg.isIrreducible(x^21 + x^19 + 1, False)
	True

